---
title: "March"
date: 2023-04-08T14:45:37+01:00
---

# Arch Linux in March 2023

## Git packaging sources

We have improved a lot of pieces in `pkgctl` according to the feedback from the
sandbox environment. Most notably it is possible to provide GitLab tokens via
the `DEVTOOLS_GITLAB_TOKEN` environment variable, pass nocheck to the build
command for bootstrap builds, handle subrelease pkgrels as well as several
bugfixes.

We are doing another round of testing and would like to proceed with the
rollout afterwards.

## devtools

A new version 20230307 has been released adding support for
architecture-specific mount config. Furthermore `sogrep` now uses the first
mirror that is configured for each repo in `pacman.conf` with a fallback to
<https://geo.mirror.pkgbuild.com>. Additionally we added checks to not allow
package releases of `PKGBUILD` sources with only weak cryptographic hashing
algorithms.

## namcap

A new version 3.4.0 has been released with a huge amount of cleanup and
codebase improvements. Furthermore new checks have been added like optdepends
and sodepends as well as improved pydepends.

## archiso

Starting with `archlinux-2023.03.01-x86_64.iso`, the official ISO supports what
is called *file system transposition* (**only on UEFI**).

This means the ISO can be simply extracted (using an archiver or by mounting
and copying) to the root of a FAT formatted partition and it will work™.
Messing with boot loader configuration files is not required anymore.

The [ArchISO][0] and [Arch Wiki][1] documentations have been updated with the
new simplified instructions.

# mkinitcpio

mkinitcpio version 35 followed by bugfix releases 35.1 and 35.2 are out!

A major new feature is support for post-generation hooks a.k.a post hooks.
These hooks get run after the initramfs generation and can be used to sign the
generated images for Secure Boot. Examples are provided [here][2] and
[here][3].

Thanks to improvements in xz reproducibility, mkinitcpio can now use
multi-threaded xz compression.

[0]: https://gitlab.archlinux.org/archlinux/archiso/-/blob/master/docs/README.transfer.rst#file-system-transposition-uefi-only
[1]: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/USB_flash_installation_medium#UEFI_only
[2]: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Unified_Extensible_Firmware_Interface/Secure_Boot#Signing_the_kernel_with_a_mkinitcpio_post_hook
[3]: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Unified_kernel_image#Signing_the_UKIs_for_Secure_Boot
