---
title: "April"
date: 2023-05-01T14:45:37+01:00
---

# Arch Linux in April 2023

## project management

We've create a [GitLab Board][0] to track all tasks related to project
management and project leadership. This Board allows us to visualize the exact
state of tasks using different lanes and labels, making it easier to keep track
of ongoing progress. Additionally, tasks will receive comments and lane updates
to reflect the latest developments. This is another step towards providing
increased transparency, structure, and visibility for our staff and users
alike.

The Board will continuously include an issue for next month's monthly report
pad, streamlining the process for staff to add noteworthy bulletpoints about
their progress.

## RFC

We proposed and accepted an RFC to change our packaging build flags from
`_FORTIFY_SOURCE=2` to `_FORTIFY_SOURCE=3` for better fortification coverage.
Once rolled out, this change provides enhanced buffer size detection and
improves the overall fortification coverage. You can find more details about
[this RFC on GitLab][1]. By making this change, we will be able to further
strengthen the security of our distro and better protect our users.

## infrastructure

We've set up an official [crates.io service account][2] and assigned ownership
of relevant projects such as various alpm and arch-audit related crates. This
allows us to better manage and control access. In the future we will be able to
use this service account to extend release automation via GitLab.

## Python

This month we've focused on the Python ecosystem and have successfully upgraded
the Python interpreter and relevant packages to version 3.11. As part of this
process, we've rebuilt all packages that were dependent on Python and have
fixed numerous issues in the process. We're pleased to report that we've
completed these upgrades by the end of April and have since moved all relevant
packages over to our binary repositories.

## Docker

We applied and were accepted into the Docker-Sponsored Open Source Program with
our Arch Linux organization. In addition to the monthly updated Docker Official
Images, being part of this program provides us with several benefits for the
images distributed through our organization. One of the key benefits is that
users pulling public images from our project namespace will receive access to
unlimited pulls and unlimited egress.

[0]: https://gitlab.archlinux.org/archlinux/project-management/-/boards
[1]: https://gitlab.archlinux.org/archlinux/rfcs/-/merge_requests/17
[2]: https://crates.io/users/archlinux-github
