---
title: "May"
date: 2023-06-01T14:45:37+01:00
---

# Arch Linux in May 2023

## Staff

We would like to welcome Anton Hvornum (torxed) and Christian Heusel (gromit)
among the Arch Linux Package Maintainers.

On top we would like to welcome Leonidas Spyropoulos (artafinde) to their new
additional duties as Arch Linux Developer

## Git packaging

We are thrilled to [announce the successful migration][0] of our packaging
ecosystem to Git, with package sources now [accessible on GitLab][1]. As part
of this transition, we have developed a powerful new tool called [pkgctl][2],
available through `devtools`, offering a user-centric design and streamlined
user experience for interacting with all aspects of Arch Linux packaging for
users and packagers alike.

Please note that our bugtracker remains on Flyspray, and we are not currently
accepting merge requests. However, opening the issue tracker and accepting
merge requests on GitLab package repositories is a top priority for us, and we
are actively working towards making this transition in the near future.

## Infrastructure

### security-tracker

We implemented nginx caching for the feed and API endpoints of the
security-tracker, effectively reducing server resource consumption. This
heavily improved server efficiency and the ability to handle a much higher
volume of requests.

### GitLab

In preparation for the migration of our packaging infrastructure to GitLab, we
successfully transferred the GitLab instance from a VPS to a harder, better,
faster, stronger bare metal server. This move not only provided a more
responsive user experience but also eliminated bottlenecks that occured during
peak times.

To enhance the search capabilities across our GitLab instance, we've set up an
OpenSearch instance. This allows us to enable [advanced search
functionality][3], facilitating faster and more efficient searches across the
entire GitLab platform. Users can now benefit from improved search accuracy and
speed, allowing for a more streamlined and productive experience when locating
specific content within GitLab.

## Open Technology Fund

Our official application to the Open Technology Fund for a comprehensive audit
of Pacman and its integration in Arch Linux has been approved. As the package
manager plays a central role in fetching software updates over the network, it
is vital for us to prioritize the safety and security of our user base. By
undertaking this audit, we aim to enhance the overall reliability and
protection of our distribution, ensuring a secure environment for our users.

The timeline for the audit is yet to be determined, and further planning on
both sides is underway.

## ArchISO

We have [removed the PGP-based signature][4] for the root file system
(`/arch/x86_64/airootfs.sfs.sig`) within the ISO. Its replacement is an OpenSSL
CMS based signature which is available since the 2022.10.01 ISO.  The signature
is made using the same code signing certificate as already used for netboot
images. The `verify=y` kernel command line option will stop working and must be
replaced with `cms_verify=y`. The official netboot and ISO's PXE menu entries
have already been [adjusted][5]. Any custom PXE setups will need to update
their boot menu entries manually.

This is done because GPG integrates poorly in the ISO build process. This only
concerns PXE booting, the PGP signature for the ISO itself is still there and
that will not change.

## mkinitcpio

We have [released mkinitcpio v36][6], which brings a lot of improvements and
several noteworthy changes. These include support for kernel command line
drop-ins for UKIs in `/etc/cmdline.d/` and `mkinitcpio.conf` drop-in files in
`/etc/mkinitcpio.conf.d/`. To utilize the `mkinitcpio.conf` drop-in files,
existing presets in `/etc/mkinitcpio.d/*.preset` must have `ALL_config`
commented out.

Additionally, a new `run_emergencyhook` function has been added for
busybox-based hooks, running before the emergency shell is launched.

## alpm-types

We started development on the Rust based [alpm-types project][7], which is
meant to provide low-level types for working with Arch Linux Package Management
(ALPM).  This library strives to provide all underlying types for writing ALPM
based software.

## AURWeb

We have [released AURWeb 6.2.4][8], which includes a number of bug fixes and
improvements. Notably, we have incorporated important dependency updates to
ensure compatibility with the latest software libraries. Additionally, we have
implemented a new package name filter option for the "Requests" feature and
support for the new repository layout for the git migration.

## bash 5.2

Preparations for the bash 5.2 upgrade are underway, including compatibility
fixes in various projects such as [pacman][9], [devtools][10], and others.
These proactive measures ensure a seamless transition to the new version while
minimizing any compatibility issues and disruptions within our ecosystem.

[0]: https://archlinux.org/news/git-migration-completed/
[1]: https://gitlab.archlinux.org/archlinux/packaging/packages
[2]: https://man.archlinux.org/man/pkgctl.1
[3]: https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/search/advanced_search.html
[4]: https://github.com/pierres/archiso-manager/pull/17
[5]: https://github.com/archlinux/archweb/pull/436
[6]: https://lists.archlinux.org/archives/list/arch-projects%40lists.archlinux.org/thread/RRMNEJD256TFNGPFBFCYB6D36PRKL7MJ/
[7]: https://gitlab.archlinux.org/archlinux/alpm/alpm-types
[8]: https://gitlab.archlinux.org/archlinux/aurweb/-/tags/v6.2.4
[9]: https://gitlab.archlinux.org/pacman/pacman/-/commit/0e938f188692c710be36f9dd9ea7b94381aed1b4
[10]: https://gitlab.archlinux.org/archlinux/devtools/-/commit/0365edb264c08b6520c8b57fadbff55967e1e948
