---
title: "July"
date: 2023-08-01T14:45:37+01:00
---

# Arch Linux in July 2023

## Staff

We would like to welcome Mario Oenning (moson) as new Arch Linux Support Staff
Member.

## devtools

arch-nspawn is now utilizing a distinct scope name instead of the previous
`--keep-unit` approach. This allows for the creation of a dedicated scope,
placing the container within a slice hierarchy which allows a more precise
resource control. This enhancement will be part of the next release.

Additionally, we've released version [v1.0.3][0], featuring several
enhancements and bug fixes. This version enables the building of unofficial
packages containing unsupported architectures and implements measures to ensure
the `PKGBUILD` file is version controlled for new repositories.

## gluebuddy

Gluebuddy, in its latest release [v0.5.6][1], brings an enhancement by
automatically providing tag protection for the entire Arch Linux namespace.
This feature ensures that all tags are safeguarded, contributing to the
integrity and security of our repositories.

## Bugtracker migration

Building upon the successful migration of packaging sources to Git, we are now
focused on transferring our bug tracking from Flyspray to GitLab. Our progress
can be monitored through [`archlinux/infrastructure#522`][2].

We have made substantial advancements in this process, including the
preparation of labels for efficient bug management, the initial implementation
of bugbuddy to streamline assignment of maintainers and labels, and a thorough
revamp of the Flyspray to GitLab conversion tool `flyspray2gitlab`, with
preliminary tests carried out in separate namespaces.

# SPI

We've completed and submitted the Software in the Public Interest (SPI) [annual
project update report for the year 2022][3]. This brief report outlines our
achievements, developments, and contributions over the past year.

[0]: https://gitlab.archlinux.org/archlinux/devtools/-/releases/v1.0.3
[1]: https://gitlab.archlinux.org/archlinux/gluebuddy/-/commit/be32986196f0268bc62240d26a800baf1be10f77
[2]: https://gitlab.archlinux.org/archlinux/infrastructure/-/issues/522
[3]: https://gitlab.archlinux.org/archlinux/project-management/-/issues/10
