---
title: "September"
date: 2022-10-03T14:32:11+02:00
---

# Arch Linux in September 2022

## RFC

We entered the final discussion period for the [RFC][0] to merge the
pacman repository `[community]` into `[extra]` as well as the packaging
VCS location `community` into `packages`. The `[core]` repository
remains limited to Developers. One the RFC is accepted, we will
implement the proposal during the migration to Git packaging.

## devtools

Changes were prepared to account for the repo merger RFC and its
resulting workflow. We are slowly approaching a state of Git packaging
that could be used productively. Once the final bits haven been
finalized, we will present the proposal and discuss the migration and
switch over.

## mailman3 migration

We have finished the full migration to [mailman3][1]. Rewriting of the
"From" header and subject (to prepend the list name) have been disabled
to keep the DKIM signature intact. This means "reply to mailing list"
must be used when replying to the list and you may need to update your
filters and rules matching the "From" header.
All existing subscriptions are migrated and you do not need to re-
subscribe.

## python2 removal

Python 2 went end of life January 2020. Since then we have been actively
cutting down the number of projects depending on python2 in our
repositories, and we have finally been able to [drop it from our
distribution][2].

## RISC-V mirror

We started [hosting][3] our latest efforts of the yet unofficial RISC-V
port. In the past year, we have a boost in progress and currently ~87.5%
of Arch x86_64 packages are available in the [riscv64 repository][4].

[0]: https://gitlab.archlinux.org/archlinux/rfcs/-/merge_requests/14
[1]: https://archlinux.org/news/arch-linux-mailing-list-changes/
[2]: https://archlinux.org/news/removing-python2-from-the-repositories/
[3]: https://riscv.mirror.pkgbuild.com/
[4]: https://lists.archlinux.org/archives/list/arch-dev-public@lists.archlinux.org/thread/NZNCFVG2QZPTTDC3WVM6ITOLSNU5MTJH/
